this is a final part of repairing a
stewart's on steam engine this is part
three and you see me cutting out the
base plate from a piece of mild steel
using my milling machine this video is
of course speeded up is a much slower
process than this and it's a good idea
to use some coolant but for the purposes
of the video and the fact that I don't
like the smell of the stuff I'm not
using coolant this is just a very sharp
slop drill plus I'm only taking shallow
cuts never take deep cuts with a piece
of metal sticking so far out of the
machine vise also it's a good idea to
wear some sort of personal protective
equipment or PPE as is known I know a
little bit about the health and safety
routines because a couple of years ago
in my recording studio I recorded quite
a lot of narrative all about health and
safety in various industries a lot of
Health and Safety is common sense
generally do not put your fingers
anywhere near the spinning round bit and
wear some protective glasses so that the
sharp pieces of metal flying all over
the place
do not hit you in the eye one thing that
is very important when using a milling
machine is the direction in which the
cutter needs to move against the work
the milling cutter always needs to be
moving towards the bit of metal that
you're cutting never with it for
instance here you see me cutting the end
parts which quite thin by now and I'm
moving the milling cutter towards the
piece of metal if I go with it the other
way it's likely to grab the piece of
metal and everything will be destroyed
the milling cutter and my piece of work
another good thing to remember is when
you turn around the piece of metal in
the machine lice brush off any swath
first because you don't want to get
pieces of swath trapped between the
metal and the jaws of the machine vise
it's most important to make sure that
the pieces of metal are held securely in
the machine lice at all times
as you can see here I'm still taking
quite shallow cuts and the paintbrush
comes in to just remove the swath so I
can see what I'm doing by using the
milling machine I got the mounting looks
to approximately the right size and now
I'm using a grinding wheel to profile
them to more of an accurate size if you
look carefully at the scribe lines on
the black pane you will see that I have
not gone fully to the depth of the
scribe lines when I mount the engine on
this base plate it may need a little bit
of trimming the main engine is a casting
and often castings and not bound to be
exactly the size you think they are
castings can be uneven
unlike bar stock which is usually very
much a regular size as usual I'm not
wearing gloves and as usual the metal
keeps getting quite hot so I'll put it
in my pot of water to cool it down
before I carry on you can also see once
again the little grinding machine moves
all over the place that's because it's
now fastened down and that's a health
and safety nono grinding wheels should
always be fastened down mine isn't
because I need to move it around to
accommodate different sizes and that's a
very bad thing and it's very wrong but
it's only for the purposes of the video
I cannot recommend that anyone uses a
grinding machine of any description
whether it be a rotary or a belt type
without it being bolted down securely to
the bench that was a health and safety
warning and this is a stewartson engine
with most of the green paint removed
apart from the paint that didn't remove
with the cellulose thinners which are
left in place as an undercoat this
original green paint was so well baked
onto the engine probably from years of
running on steam it seemed like a good
idea to leave it where it was as an
undercoat all I'm doing now is
accurately marking out the bed plate and
after machining the bed plate to the
finished size I drilled and reamed four
holes in the mounting lugs
then over to the lathe and all I had to
do was turn 4-step bushes that pressed
into the quarter inch reamed holes and
the hole in the center of these bushes
was five thirty seconds of an inch in
diameter here's one of the bush is
almost complete before final party off
and now you see the bushes pressed into
the baseplate on the engine itself which
has now been painted in Stewart models
green here's a finished engine running
quite sweetly I fitted a replacement
lubricated to the engine the other
homemade lubricated was a bit of a mess
this one is quite a nice-looking one and
works very well and the other lubricator
had a drain fitted to the bottom of
it and I use this in the crankcase to
drain the oil so that's about it for
this shot series the engine runs very
well as you can see here and it's got a
proper base plate with for mounting lugs
what more could you want thanks for
watching and hope you found it useful